## **Unlocking Insights with NYC Yellow Taxi Data using Big Data Technologies** 🚖

In this repository, we leverage the power of Big Data technologies to perform data-driven business operations on the NYC Yellow Taxi dataset. Our toolkit includes industry-standard tools and services such as:

__AWS EMR:__ Harness the scalability of Amazon Elastic MapReduce for efficient data processing and analysis.

__AWS RDS (MySQL):__ Store and manage structured data seamlessly with Amazon RDS, a reliable and high-performance database service.

__Hadoop:__ Utilize the robust Hadoop ecosystem for distributed data storage and processing.

__Apache Scoop:__ Streamline data ingestion between Hadoop and relational databases effortlessly.

__Apache HBase:__ Leverage the NoSQL capabilities of Apache HBase for high-speed, random read/write access to your data.

__MapReduce:__ Implement MapReduce algorithms to extract valuable insights from massive datasets

### **Data**
* We use the [New York City TLC yellow taxi data set](https://www.nyc.gov/site/tlc/about/tlc-trip-record-data.page) for the year 2017
* The data dictionary can be found [here](https://www.nyc.gov/assets/tlc/downloads/pdf/data_dictionary_trip_records_yellow.pdf)

## **Approach** 

* The project was broken down into the following 4 tasks
  
* Please refer to attached files for detailed explanations with code samples and screenshots

### Task 1: Setting up the environment and loading data

* I created an RDS (Relational Database Service) instance on my AWS account and uploaded data to the RDS instance
    * I created an appropriate schema for the data sets to upload them to RDS
      
* I created an AWS EMR Instance with the above services.
    * I used the m4.xlarge cluster with ample storage size since we are working with a huge data set
    * I used a single master node instead of a multi-node cluster to limit my AWS credit consuption
      
* I then proceeded to connect RDS with the EMR instance
  
* I then logged into RDS through EMR instance
  
* I created the "yellow_taxi" database followed by the table "trip_records"

* I then downloaded the data files onto the EMR cluster using wget "url" command

* To load the data into MySQL table, I logged in and run appropriate SQL commands

* I confirmed the data was loaded into the table by running simple SQL queries and observing the outputs

### Task 2: Ingesting data from RDS into the HBase table using Sqoop

* First, I logged in into the EMR instance and completed the initial steps of setup

  * Now I istalled the MySQL connector jar file then run appropriate step to extract the MySQL connector tar file

  * I then went to MySQL connector directory and copied it the the Sqoop library to complete the installation
    
* Having now installed the MySQL Connector. I now set up MySQL on EMR cluster and proceeded

* I run appropriate commands to ingest data from MySQL RDS to HBase table

### Task 3: Bulk inport subsequent files to HBase table

* I bulk imported data from subsequent files in the dataset on the EMR cluster to the HBase table using relevant codes

* See the Python code (batch_ingest.py) used

### Task 4 : Using MapReduce to perform data analysis on files downloaded to the EMR instance

* Refer to the MapReduceTasks file for a detailed approach with screenshots
  
* Refer to the corresponding mrtask_#.py files for Python codes used

* The following business questions where explored:

  * Which vendors have the most trips, and what is the total revenue generated by that vendor?
    
  * Which pickup location generates the most revenue?
    
  * What are the different payment types used by customers and their count?
    
  * What is the average trip time for different pickup locations?
    
  * Calculate the average tips to revenue ratio of the drivers for different pickup locations in sorted format
    
  * How does revenue vary over time? Calculate the average trip revenue per month - analyzing it by hour of the day (day vs night) and the day of the week (weekday vs weekend)

 
